---
sidebar_position: 4
---

# 51% Attack

A Detailed Explanation of the 51% Attack.

Refer to the concept of mining [51% Attack](../../../mining/concepts/reorg-orphan-51attack.md).

## What is a 51% Attack

A 51% attack refers to a situation in a blockchain network where a single entity or organization controls more than 50%
of the network's computational power (hash rate), enabling them to perform malicious actions on the blockchain. This
attack primarily targets blockchain networks that use the Proof of Work (PoW) consensus mechanism, such as Bitcoin and
Ethereum.

## Conditions for a 51% Attack

To execute a 51% attack, the following conditions must be met:

### 1. Control Over 50% of the Hash Rate

The attacker must possess more than 50% of the network's computational power. This means the attacker can mine more
blocks than all other nodes combined, thus controlling the generation of new blocks.

### 2. Resources and Costs

Controlling over 50% of the hash rate requires enormous hardware resources and electricity costs. For large blockchain
networks like Bitcoin, these costs are extremely high, often requiring tens of thousands of mining machines and a
substantial amount of electricity.

## Potential Harms of a 51% Attack

### 1. Double Spend Attack

The attacker can use a 51% attack to achieve double spending, where the same cryptocurrency can be spent twice. This is
done by creating a forked chain that includes double-spending transactions and quickly surpasses the original chain,
allowing the attacker to roll back transactions and reuse the same coins.

### 2. Blocking Transaction Confirmations

The attacker can prevent other miners from confirming transactions, causing specific transactions to be excluded from
blocks. This results in a denial-of-service (DoS) attack, making the network unreliable.

### 3. Reorganizing the Blockchain

The attacker can reorganize the blockchain by creating a longer forked chain, thereby reversing previously confirmed
transactions. This undermines the blockchain's immutability and transparency, reducing user trust in the network.

## How to Prevent a 51% Attack

### 1. Increasing Hash Rate and Decentralization

By attracting more miners to join the network, increasing the overall hash rate, and ensuring decentralized distribution
of computational power, the risk of a single entity controlling the majority of the hash rate is reduced.

### 2. Using Other Consensus Mechanisms

Adopting other consensus mechanisms, such as Proof of Stake (PoS), can reduce the likelihood of a 51% attack. In PoS,
attackers need to control a large amount of tokens, making the cost and risk significantly higher.

### 3. Protocol Improvements

Protocol-level improvements, such as the block validation and chain reorganization prevention measures implemented by
the Bitcoin Core development team, can effectively reduce the risk of a 51% attack.

### 4. Increasing Transaction Confirmation Numbers

Users can wait for more transaction confirmations to increase the difficulty of malicious rollbacks. Generally, six
confirmations are considered safe.

### 5. Enhancing Detection and Response Capabilities

Monitoring mechanisms can be implemented within the network to promptly detect abnormal hash rate growth and suspicious
activities. Quick responses can be taken to prevent attacks.

## Conclusion

A 51% attack is a severe threat to blockchain networks, requiring attackers to control more than 50% of the hash rate.
It can lead to double spend attacks, blocking of transactions, and blockchain reorganization. By increasing hash rate
and decentralization, adopting other consensus mechanisms, improving protocols, increasing transaction confirmation
numbers, and enhancing detection and response capabilities, the risk of a 51% attack can be effectively mitigated,
ensuring the security and reliability of the blockchain network. Understanding 51% attacks and their prevention measures
helps in better maintaining and protecting the security of blockchain networks.
